Justice In Deciding Disputes: Precedent
82
whole character of his judgement41 Fourthly, the best type of report is one which indicates,
the arguments of counsel and sets out the judgment, or relevant portion of it, verbatim. A
report which only summaries the judgment should only be used in the absence of a fuller
report, but may not even then carry much weight42 Finally in the absence of all else the oral
account of a case by a barrister is admissible, though again this may be of limited value.43
Application of precedents
A precedent influences future decision. Every decision is pronounced on a specific set of
past facts and from the decision on those facts a rule has to be extracted and projected into
the future. No one can foresee, the precise situations that will arise, so that rule has to be
capable of applying to a range of broadly similar situations against a background of changing
conditions. It has therefore to be in general terms and ‘malleable’. As pointed out at the
beginning of the book, no word has one proper meaning, nor can anyone see to fix the
meaning of words for others, so that interpretation of the rule remain flexible and openended44
.
Applying a precedent to the instant case is a process of matching the fact –pattern of the
precedent and the ruling thereon with the fact-pattern of the instant case; if they match, the
rule is applied, if not, it is distinguished. This involves the first two kinds of knowledge
mentioned at the start of this chapter, namely, knowing the facts and knowing the law
applicable to those facts.
Knowing the facts
 Knowing the facts of the instant case involves an exercise of discretion. This lies initially
in believing or disbelieving the testimony of witnesses and weighing it on a balance of
probability. Judges are human, so the quirks of individual personalities may also play some
part occasionally.45 The discretionary element is most significant in knowing how to state the
facts, for, as pointed out in Chapter 146, it is not knowledge of facts, but knowledge of how to
state facts that is relevant; and this applies to the statement of facts of both the instant and the

41 Bromley v. Bromley (1965) P 111 [1965] 3 All ER 226 See also Young v. North Riding Justices
(1965) 1 QB 502 at 508, (1965) 1 All ER 141 at 143-144, where the omission from the revised version
of a point included in the Justices of the Peace Report was considered; and R v. Cockburn [1968] 1 All
ER 466 at 468, [1968] 1 WLR 281 at 283-284, where the court repudiated a remark in another case,
which is reported in the All England Law Reports and Weekly Law Reports, but is eliminated from the
Law Report and Criminal Appeal Reports.
42 Hallett J in Rivoli Hats Ltd. V. Gooch [1953] 2 All ER 823 at 824, [1953] 1 WLR 1190 at 1192
commenting on the summarized report of Clayton Newbury Ltd. V. Findlay in (1951) Current Law
Consolidation 65 (a fuller report was immediately included in [1953] 1 WLR 1194; and, less fully, in
[1953] 2 All ER 826. See also Haley v. London Electricity Board [1965] AC 778, [1964] 3 All ER 185,
commenting on Pritchard v. Post Office as reported in [1950] WN 310 and (1950) 114 JP 370.
43 See the observations of Lord Morton in Champan v. Chapman [1954] AC 429 at 464-465, [1954] 1
All ER 798 at 815-816.
44 See Stone Legal System and Lawyers’ Reasonings pp 35-36.
45 See pp 220-225 post.
46 See pp 7-8 ante. 
Justice In Deciding Disputes: Precedent
83
precedent cases. As Lord Simon has said. ‘What is relevant is not only the statement of
material facts by the deciding judge, but also their re-statement by other judges in later
cases.47
First, the art of knowing how to state facts involves the distinction between statements of
primary and secondary (or/inferential) facts: between saying, eg that A did so and so at such
a time in such a place and saying that A acted negligently. ‘Negligence’ is commonly treated
as a question of fact, but since it is a matter of inference from a set of primary facts two couts
may state the inferential fact differently while agreeing on the primary facts48
Secondly, there is knowledge of how to state facts at different levels of generality, which
makes it possible for the deciding judge and a judge in a later case to make different
statements of facts. Thus, A may have driven a Rolls Royce car at 30 mph through Piccadilly
Circus at 2 pm on a certain Wednesday, run into B and Broken his right leg. The individual A
may be generalized into ‘person’; the Rolls Royce car may be generalized into ‘vehicle’;
Piccadilly Circus into ‘public highway’; 30 mph through Piccadilly Circus at 2 pm. On
Wednesday into negligence; and B’s broken right leg into physical injury to the person. A
restatement of these facts at a more general level would be: ‘a person inflicted of physical
damage’; and more generally still: ‘the negligent infliction of damage. The higher the level of
generality, the wider the scope of the proposition. It is clear at a glance that negligent
infliction of damage’ is winder than just ‘the breaking of a given person’s right leg by the
careless driving of a Roll Royce Car’. A later judge is at liberty to accept as the factstatement of A v B a proposition at any level along the scale. Thus, one who is confronted
with situation in which a careless false statement has caused damage to person or property,
and who wishes to utilise the decision in A v B in order to hold the defendant liable, would
no doubt regard that case as authority for the negligent infliction of physical damage’, since
only at this level of generality would the ruling become wide enough to cover the instant
case49. On the other hand, another judge, wishing to impose liability for pecuniary loss
would no doubt prefer the widest interpretation of A v. B, namely, the negligent infliction of
damage.50
Thirdly, it is necessary to know how to select the material facts. The fewer material facts
included in a statement, the wider is its scope. In Rylands v. Fletcher51 the facts were as
follows: (i) A had a reservoir built; (ii) A employed B to build it; (iii) A wasw not himself
negligent; (iv) B was negligent; (v) water escaped woing to B’s negligent construction of the

47 FA & AB Ltd v. Lupton (Inspector of Taxes) [1972] AC 634 at 659, 659, [1971] 3 All ER 948 at
964, 965.
48 Benmax v. Austin Motor Co Ltd. [1955] AC 370, [1955] 1 All ER 326.
49 Eg. Asquith LJ in Candler v. Crane, Christmas & fCo [1951] 2 KB 164 at 189, [1951] 1 All ER 426
at 439; Clayton v. Woodman & Son (Builders) Ltd [1962] 2 QB 533, [1961] 3 All ER 249 (revd on the
facts without affecting the principle [1962] 2 QB at 546, [1962] 2 All ER 891.
50 Eg Ross v Caunters [1980] Ch 297, [1979] 3 ALL ER 580; Junior Books Ltd. V. Veitchi Co Ltd.
[1983] 1 AC 520, [1982] 3 All ER 201.
51 [1868] LR 3 HL 330, and see Goodhart ‘The Ratio Decidendi of a Case’ in Essays in jurisprudence
and the Commn Law pp 17-18.
Justice In Deciding Disputes: Precedent
84
reservoir and damaged C’s property. Only facts (i) and (v) were treated as material by the
court. By ignoring the absence and presence of negligence in A and B respectively, and by
generalising fact (i) into ‘anything likely to do mischief, the decision creates the sweeping
rule that whoever brings a ‘mischievous substance’ on to his land is liable for damage52
caused by its escape, irrespective of negligence.
Connected with this, fourthly, is the ability of a later judge to review the material facts of the
precedent and add to or subtract from the sub-total of facts selected by the deciding judge; or
he may re-state the facts at a different level of generality. Such re-statements extend or
restrict the ambit of the precedent in Wilsons and Clyde Coal Co Ltd. English53 the
employers were held liable for the death of one of their employees owing to the default of
another employee. At that date a servant could not hold his employer vicariously liable for an
injury inflicted by a fellow-servant because of the prevailing doctrine of commonemployment, which has since been abolished. Therefore, to hold the employers liable, it was
essential to the ratio decidendi to ignore the fact that the party at fault was a servant and to
say that the employers were being held liable, nor vicariously, but for the breach of a
personal non-delegable duty to ensure that reasonable care would be taken. So stated, the rule
would attach liability to the employer of even an independent contractor. In Davie v. New
Merton Board Mills Ltd54, however, Viscount Simonds and Lord Reid appeared to place an
interpretation upon Wilsons’ Case which would dismantle this rule. They stressed the
materiality of the fact that it was not a contractor but a servant who had been at fault, which
would involve a fundamental reinterpretation of the case55 The Employer’s Liability
(Defective Equipment) Act 1969, how now overruled Davie and restored the original
interpretation of Wilsons in statutory form. The point is even more vividly brought out in the
two Wagon Mound cases. A quantity of furnace oil was carelessly allowed to spill overboard
from the SS Wagon Mound into the waters of a harbour. In Wagon Mound56 the Judicial
Committee of the Privy Council Proceeded on the finding of the lower court that, according
to scientific opinion at that date, the ignition of the oil in such circumstances was not
reasonably foreseeable, and accordingly held that there was no answerability in negligence
for damage by fire. In Wagon Mound (No. 2)57, however, brought by different plaintiffs but
based on the same occurrence, the lower court stated that a bare possibility of fire might have

52 Subsequent Interpretation of damage leaves open whether it includes personal injury: Miles v Forest
Rock Granite Co (Leicestercsire) Ltd (1918) 34 TLR 500; Shiffmtan v. Order of St John [1936] 1 All
ER 557 Hale v. Jenning’s [1938] 1 All ER 579; Perry v. Kendricks Transport Ltd [1956] 1 All ER 154,
[1956] 1 WLR 85 Cf Read v. J Lyons & Co Ltd. [1947] AC 156, [1946] 2 ALL ER 471.
53 [1938] AC 57, [1937] 3 All ER 628.
54 [1959] AC 604, [1959] 1 All ER 346 (overruled by the Employer’s Liability (Defective Equipment)
Act 1969).
55 [1959] AC at 621-622, 631, [1959] 1 All ER at 351-353, 358. See now Clerk & Lindsell on Torts, &
10-102. See also the attensuation of Bailey v. Deddes [1938] 1 KB 156, [1937] 3 All ER 671, in Knight
v. Sampson [1938] 3 All ER 309; Chisholm v. London Passenger Transport Board [1939] 1 KB 426,
[1938] 4 All ER 850; Wilkinson v. Chetham-Strode [1940] 2 KB 310, [1940] 2 All ER 643; London
Passenger Transport Board v. Upson [1949] AC 155, [1949] 1 All ER 60.
56 [1961] AC 388, [1961] 1 All ER 404.
57 [1967] 1 AC 617, [1961] 2 All ER 709. 
Justice In Deciding Disputes: Precedent
85
been foreseeable, but that the chance was so remote that it should be ignored. Accordingly,
the defendants were held not liable on the basis that fire was not reasonably foreseeable. The
Judicial Committee fastened on this advertence to even a bare possibility of fire as
constituting a material difference between the first and the second case, and, reversing the
lower court, held the defendant liable in negligence for fire damage after all. It will thus be
seen how stressing one factor as material not only enabled two different courts to reach
opposite results in the same case, but also enabled the same court to reach opposite results in
two cases based on the same happening.
 Fifthly, there is the art of knowing how to make different statements by taking different
combinations of facts. The facts in Donoghue v. Stevenson58 may be listed as follows, (i) A
was a manufacturer of ginger beer; (ii) A was assumed to have been negligent in that a snail
was alleged to have been found in one of the bottles; (iii) acting under contract with a retailer,
B, A delivered the tainted bottle to B without knowing that it contained a snail and thereby
committed a breach of his contract with B; (iv) B, acting under contract with C, innocently
passed the bottle to C, thereby committing a breach of his contract with C; (v) C innocently
passed the bottle to D; (vi) there had been no opportunity for an intermediate examination of
the bottle at any sage since it left. A; (vii), D was allegedly poisoned by drinking the remains
of the snail; (viii) this being a Scottish case, D sued A in the Scottish courts, and the case was
referred to the House of Lords on a preliminary point. It was held that, assuming A had been
negligent in leaving a snail in the bottle, A would be liable to D. the case was remitted to the
Scottish court for a decision on fact (ii), namely, whether there had in truth been a different
combinations of the above facts. In the first place, on fact (viii) alone it might have been
argued that an appeal from Scotland is not binding on English courts, since Scots law is a
different system59. Secondly on facts (i), (ii), (vi) and (vii) it could be said that a negligent
manufacturer is liable for damage to the ultimate consumer where there is no likelihood of an
intermediate examination the manufacturer proposition. Thirdly, on facts (ii), (ii), (vi) and
(vii) it could be said that anyone who negligently misperforms a contract and physically
damages a thirdly party, whom he ought reasonably to have contemplated as likely to be
affected, is liable to such thirdly party in tort, though he would not be liable in contact.
Fourthly, on facts (ii) and (vii) it could be said that anyone who negligently damages another,
whom he ought reasonably to have contemplated as likely to be affected, it liable the
neighbour proposition. Only in the light of later cases is it possible to determine the ratio
decidendi of this important case. In recent years courts have come to regard the fourth
proposition as being its ratio60, while previously they generally adopted the second61. It is

58 [1932] AC 562.
59 Not after Heyman v. Darwins [1942] AC 356 at 401, [1942] 1 ALL ER 337 at 361.
60 Home office v. Dorset. Yacht co. ltd. [1970] AC 1004, [1970] 2 All ER 294; Anns v. Merton London
Dorough Council [1978] AC 728, [1977] 2All ER 492; Ross v. Caunters [1980] Ch 297, [1979] 3 All
ER 580; Junior Books Ltd. V. Veitchi Co Ltd. [1983] 1 AC 520, [1982] 3 All ER 201.
61 Eg Howard v. Walker and Lake (Trustees) and Crisp [1947] DKB 860 at 863g. 
Justice In Deciding Disputes: Precedent
86
clear, therefore, that until recently tribunals had the choice of adopting one or the other.62 In
this way a case may even be given an interpretation quite other than that of the deciding
judge.
Finally, as an aside, it may be remarked that Donoghue’s case strikingly illustrates the point
that what is important in law is the statement of facts rather than even their truth. The house
of lords remitted the case to the Scottish court for trial on the ruling laid down by the House,
but this did not take place because of the death of one of the parties. So the truth as to
whether or not there was a snail in the bottle was never established and is irrelevant to the
ruling.
 Wide though the possibilities are of making different statements of facts, they are limited
by the consensual domain of the usual meanings of words. The facts of Donoghue’s case
would support any of the statements given above, but not, eg the statement that the defendant
caused a public nuisance.
Knowing the law
What is ‘law’ in a precedent is its ruling or ratio decidendi, which concerns future litigants as
well as those involved in the instant dispute. Knowing the law in this context means knowing
how to extract the rationes decidendi from cases. Satatements not part of the ratio decidendi
as obiter dicta and are not authoritative. Three shades of meaning can be attached to the
expression ‘ratio decidendi’. The first, which is the translation of it, is the reason for (or of)
deciding63. Even a finding of fact may in this sense be the ratio decidendi. Thus, a judge may
state a rule and then decide that the facts do not fall within it. Secondly it may mean the rule
of law proffered by the judge as the basis of his decision’; or thirdly, it may mean the rule of
law which others regard as being of binding authority.
 There is a temptation to suppose that a case has one fixed ruling which is there and
discoverable here and now and once and for all. This is not so, for the ratio is not only the
ruling given by the deciding judge for his decision, but any one of a series of rulings as
elucidated by subsequent interpretations64 the pronouncement of the judge who decided the
case is a necessary step towards ascertaining the ratio, but the process by no means ends
there; subsequent interpretation is at least as significant, sometimes more so. ‘it is not
sufficient’, said Jessel MR.
That the case should have been decided on a principle if that principle is not itself a
right principle, or one noe applicable to the case, and it is for a subsequent judge to

62 ‘Wherever the court wishes to find for the plaintiff, that doctrine (the fourth proposition) will be
invoked, just as it will be disregarded when the defendant is the favoured party: Landon in Pollock on
Torts p 329.
63 Lord Dinning MR in Paal Wilson & Co A/S v. Partenreederi Hannah Blumenthal [1983] 1 AC 854 at
873, [1982] 3 All ER 394 at 400, (varied [1983] 1 AC 854, [1983] 1 All ER 34, HL).
64 Goodhart Essays in Jurisprudence and the Common Law pp2 
Justice In Deciding Disputes: Precedent
87
say whether or not, it is a right principle, and, if not, he may himself lay down the
true principle’
65
Cases of overruling and reversal by superior authority are obvious instances of subsequent
correction, but they are not within the scope of the immediate discussion. For, apart from
these, the judge in a later case may restrict or enlarge the ruling as stated by the deciding
judge, or he may reinterpret that ruling in such a away as to relegate it to the status of an
obiter dictum. Accordingly, ratio is best regarded as a pointer towards the direction which
subsequent decision should take within a board spectrum of variations. It is not something
identifiable once and far all, but a continuing process, and as such it has to be viewed in a
continuum of time.
(1) Difficult though the task of finding the ratio is, there would be a measure of
agreement in propounding that no rule should be treated as ratio which would not
support the ultimate order66. Where a stated rule obviously bears no relation to
the facts, it is no more than a dictum.
(2) Even when the deciding judge has given no reason for the decision, it may be
possible for a subsequent tribunal to exact one from it67. However, no judge is
required to accomplish the impossible. If it is not clear’, said Viscount Dunedin,
‘then I do not think it is part of the tribunal’s duty to spell out with great
difficulty a ratio decidendi in order to be bound by it68
.
(3) It follows from what has previously been said that different rations may be
extracted from a case depending on different ways of stating the facts.
(4) More rarely, a judge may demote a proposition in a previous case from its status
of ratio to that of dictum. Thus, the ‘neighbour’ proposition in Donoghue v.

65 Osborne v. Rowlett (1880) 13 ChD 774 at 785. Lord Reid, in attempting to find the ratio decidendi
of an earlier case, said ‘If I had to try, the result might depend on whether or not I was striving to
obtain a narrow ratio: Scruttons Ltd. V. Midland Silicones Ltd. [1962] 1 All ER 1 at 12. Cf Devlin J
oin Behrens v Bertram Mills Circus Ltd. [1957] 2 QB 1 at 24, [1957] 1 All Er 583 at 594.
66 The reason sine qua non: Cardozo ‘Jurisprudence’ in Selected writings (ed Hall) p 33. See also Lord
Denning in Penn-Texas Corpn v. Murat Anstalt (No. 2) [1964] 2 QB 647 at 660-661, [1964] 2 All ER
594 at 597; Harper v. National Coal Board (Intended Action) [1974] QB 614 at 621, [1974] 2 All ER
441 at 446. In Pinchin v. Santam Insurance Co. Ltd. 1963 (2) SA 254 (WLD) the ruling on a point
which did not affect the ultimate decision was nevertheless made part of the ratio by being made the
basis of the order on costs. See also The Wagon Mound (No. 2) [1967] 1 AC 617, [1966] 2 All ER 709,
for the relationship between rulings and the ultimate order.
67 Eg Giles v. Walker (1890) 24 QBD 656, discussed in Davey v. Harrow Corpn [1958] 1 QB 60 at 71-
72, [1957] 2 All ER 305 at 309-310.
68 Great Western Rly Co. v. Mosyn (Owners), The Mostym [1928] AC 57 at 73. A remark by Lord
Reid in Nash (Inspector of Taxes) v. Tamplin & Sons Brewery, Brighton, Ltd. (1952) AC 231 at 250,
[1951] 2 All ER 869 at 880, to the effect that every case must have a ratio decidendi and that this
should either be applied or distinguished appear to have been contradicted by Lord Ried himself in
Scruttons Ltd. V. Midland Silicones Ltd. [1962] AC 446 at 479, [1962] 1 All ER 1 at 14, which he
despaired of finding the ratio decidendi of a previous case. 
Justice In Deciding Disputes: Precedent
88
Stevenson used to change its category according to whether the plaintiff or the
defendant was thought entitled to succeed69
.
(5) Certain types of cases do not deserve to be authorities. One type, already alluded
to, is that in which there is no discoverable ratio decidendi. Others are cases
turning purely on facts70, those involving the exercise of discretion71, and those
which judges themselves to not think worthy of being precedents72. Decisions on
the interpretation of documents are sometimes used as precedents, which is
regrettable since a court may find itself construing, not the document before it,
but judicial interpretations of similar working in other, slightly different
documents73. I do not think it right’, said Lord Denning MR, ‘ to look at previous
cases in this way. The only legitimate purpose is to use them as a guide towards
the meaning of words, so as to help in the search for the testators’ intention. They
should never be used so as to defeat this intention’
74
 The difficulties so far considered by no means exhaust the problems that may arise,
some of which are incapable of solutions. A case may involve two points, A and B, and a
decision on either in favour of the defendant, be it supposed, is conclusive of the matter,
while the plaintiff has to win on both A and B in order to win. Suppose that the judge decides
in the defendant’s favour on both issues. Which is the ratio, since either is sufficient to
support the decision?75. On the other hand, if he decides in favour of the plaintiff on point A,
but in favour of the plaintiff on point A, but in favour of the defendant on point B, who
accordingly win, and if it is accepted that no ruling can be ratio unless it supports the order
made, then the decision on point A is obiter. Even as a dictum it may nevertheless carry such
authority that a subsequent tribunal may feel obliged to follow it. If so, the nomenclature
ratio decidendi or obiter dictum for the decision on point A crease to matter. In Hedley Byrne
& Co. Ltd. V. Heller & Partners Ltd.76 the House of Lords overthrew a rule by virtue of

69 See Fairman v. Pertetual Investment. Burlding Society [1923] AC 74, as interpreted by Scott LJ in
Haseldine v. CA Daw & Son Ltd. [1941] 2 KB 343, [1941] 3 All ER 156, and in Doylan v. Dublin
Corpn [1949] IR 60, and in Pearson v. Lambeth Borough Council [1950] 2 KB 353, [1950] 1 All ER
682. See also Jacobs v. LCC [1950] AC 361; [1950] 1 All ER 737. See further Adam v. Ward [1917]
AC 309, as interpreted in Egger v. Viscount Chelmsford [1965] 1 QB 248, [1964] 3 All ER 406.
70 Simpson v. Peat [1952] 2 QB 24 at 28, [1952] 1 All ER 447 at 449; R v. Young [1953] 1 All ER 2g1.
71 Bragg v. Crosville Motor Services Ltd. [1959] 1 All ER 613 at 615, [1959] 1 WLR 324 at 326.
72 R v. Stokesley (Torkshire) Justices, ex p Bartram [1956] 1 All ER 563 at 565, [1956] 1 WLR 254 at
258.
73 See the observations of Jessel MR in Aspden v. Seddon (1875) 10 Ch App 394 at 397, 398. As to
whether such cases should be reported, see Moran The Heralds of the Law ch 7, summarizing the views
of Lord Lindley, Mews and Burrows.
74 Re Jebb, Ward-Smith v. Jebb (1966) Ch. 666 at 672, [1965] 3 All ER 358 at 361.
75 In Said v. Butt [1920] 2 KB 497, the judge made it clear that his decision on point B was additional,
which makes it a dictum.
76 [1964] AC 465, [1963] 1 All ER 575. In the South African case of Pinchin v. Santam Insurance Co.
Ltd. 1963 (2) SA 254 (WLD) the judge made his decision for the plaintiff on point A part of the ratio
decidendi by basing his order as to costs on it. See also The Wagon Mound (No. 2) [1967] 1 AC 617,
[1966] 2 All ER 709. 
Justice In Deciding Disputes: Precedent
89
which the defendant had succeeded in the court of appeal and propounded a different rule,
but with a qualification attached so that the defendant was still able to win. This rule and
qualification together constitute the ratio; but even if it were said to be a dictum, the
distinction is immaterial at this level of authority.
A judge may embark upon a line of reasoning involving a rule which justifies a certain
conclusion. He may then proceed along another line of reasoning involving a different rule,
wider on narrower, which also justifies that conclusion77. Lord simonds once declared that if
two reasons are put forwarded by a court for its decision, both should be accepted as part of
the radio decidendi78. One may later be rejected, as in Fisher v. Tayler’s Furnishing Stores
Ltd. 9 where the Court of appeal rejected as incorrect one of the two grounds which it had
given in an earlier case, and the rejection was later confirmed by both the Court of Appeal
and the House of Lords10. Again, if the House of Lords has given two reasons for a decision,
and declares subsequently that one of them is correct and the other wrong, the authoritative
ruling is the correct one11. This shows how subsequent interpretation determines the ratio
decidendi as between two stated rulings. Another illustration of the difficulty is Donoghue v.
Stevenson12 in which there are three rulings justifying the result, the wide ‘neighbour’ rule,
the narrower ‘manufacturer’ rule and the ‘fallacy of contractual privity’s rule. It has been
pointed out that judges used to regard the first as being ratio or dictum according to the way
in which they wished to decide. On the other hand, even the considered opinion of a judge on
a point not raised or argued will probably be treated as a dictum13. The Same applies to a
proposition which is merely a proposition of law assumed by the [Board] to be correct for the
purpose of that particular case14.
These complications multiply in appellate tribunals where there is a plurality of
judgments. It may happen that all the judges agree in the result for different reasons. Suppose
that each of five judges gives a different reasons for arriving at the same result and without
disagreeing with the reasons given and a subsequent tribunal may be said to have five
competing retiones and a subsequent tribunal may adopt any of them for the purpose of
deciding the case before itself. Suppose instead that each of the five not only gives a different
reason for the same conclusion, but also rejects the reasons given by the other four15. Here
the difficulty in the way of adopting any one opinion is that it has been condemned in four
others. Such a case, it is submitted, has no discoverable ratio and is, in any event, worthless
as an authority. It has so far been assumed that the judges agrees in the result. Whether they
disagree, further difficulties arise. As long as three at least our of five, or two out of three,
concur in the result for the same reason, their view may be said to constitute the ratio16.
Where the majority differ in their reasons while the minority agree on the reason for their
dissent, it is difficult to say what the discretion17. Finally, if a case has more than one issue
and the tribunal is not that arise cannot be resolved by any test. The judge in a subsequent

77 Eg Denning LJ in Broom v. Morgan [1953] 1 QB 597 at 609-610, [1953] 1 All ER 849 at 854-855.
78 Jacobs v. LCC [1950] AC 361 at 369-371, [1950] 1 All ER 737 at 741-742. To the same effect, Lord
Bramwell in Membery v. Great Western Rly co. (1889) 14 App Gas 179 at 187; Lord MacNaghten in
New South Wales Taxation Comrs v. Palmer [1907] AC 179 at 184; Greer LJ in London Jewellers Ltd.
V. Attenborough [1934] 2 KB 206 at 222; Pearce LJ in Cane (Valuation Officer) v. Royal College of
Music [1961] 2 QB 89 at 114; [1961] 2 All ER 12 at 24; Stamp J in Rogers v. Longsdon [ 
Justice In Deciding Disputes: Precedent
90
case interpretation he chooses upon it18. All this does not imply that the solution would be to
have only one judgement, even if the court is agreed. Differences in presentation and working
will avoid the danger of any one judge’s utterance being treated like an Act of Parliament19.
Obiter Dicta
Pronouncements of law, which are not part of the ratio decidendi, are classed as obiter dicta
and are not authoritative. Rationes and dicta tend to shade into each other. The former have
law-quality and are binding on lower courts, dicta, too, have law-quality, but are not binding
at all. Vis-a-vis a higher court even the ratio dicdendi of a lower court decision has only
persuasive force like that of a dictum. It has been pointed out that some dicta are so
authoritative that the distinction between ratio and dictum is reduced to vanishing point.
Dicta, which have no force, are propositions stated by way of illustration or on hypothetical
facts20. Greater difficulties attend ruling of law which are subsequently relegated to the
status of dicta by interpretation. The distinction in such cases between ratio and dictum is but
a device employed by subsequent courts for the adoption or rejection of doctrine expressed in
previous cases according to the inclination of the judges. An example would be the treatment
of Lord Atkin’s neighbour’ proposition in subsequent cases.
The weight accorded to dicta varies with the type of dictum. Mere casual expressions carry
no weight at all. ‘Not every passing expression of a judge, however eminent, can be treated
as an ex cathedra statement1. On the other hand, dicta which have been acted upon over the
years may acquire increasing respect2. A dictum may also be adopted as the ratio decidendi
of a subsequent decision and will then acquire the authority of that tribunal. In Zeidman v.
Owen3 Lord Goddard CJ said ‘If we thought that the dicta, though obiter, expressed the true
construction of the Act, we should feel we ought to follow them. Finally, a suggestion has
been offered that a distinction be drawn between obiter dicta, those irrelevant to the case, and
judicial dicta, those relevant to some collateral matter but no part of the radio4. The latter will
generally be more persuasive than the former.
Subsequent history of a case
It should be abundantly clear from all this that the ratio decidendi of a case depends on the
interpretation put upon it no less than on what the deciding judge himself propounded. Later
history is thus an indispensable and continuing part of ratio. It also shows the limits of
bindingness.
Reversal
A case may be reversed on appeal. The effect of reversal is normally that the first judgment
ceases to have any effect at all. The situation is different if the case is affirmed or reversed by
an appellate court on a different point from that on which the decision in the lower court was
based. In one case, Master of the Rolls said that in such a situation the previous decision will
be of no effect at all5. This probably goes too far, and in another case it was said that the first
judgment remains binding6. The truth seems to be that in such a situation a later court has
freedom to deal as it pleases with the earlier decision.
Refusal to follow 
Justice In Deciding Disputes: Precedent
91
Before the doctrine of stare decisis came into being, judges freely refused to follow cases
which they considered to be contrary to principle. A judge may even now refuse to follow a
decision of co-ordinate authority, in which event the conflict awaits resolution by a superior
tribunal. Repeated refusals to follow will weaken the authority of a case; as also the refusal
by a higher court to adopt the rule enunciated by a lower court, but only if such refusal
implies disapproval of it.
The growing volume of reported cases often leads to unavoidable overlooking of relevant
authorities. Sometimes, however, a precedent may be deliberately put on one side, though
this is done rarely and perhaps as a last resort. Thus, Sellers LJ once said ‘the best way to
deal with that case is to say that it goes into the limbo of lost causes8.
Distinguishing
Repeated distinguishing of a case is evidence that the decision is not approved, and the effect
may also be to confine it more and more closely to its own special facts.
It should be evident already that the bindingness is stare decisis is not rigid since judges have
some latitude in evading unwelcome authorities9. All that the doctrine means is that a judge
must follow a precedent except where he can reasonably distinguish it; but the possibilities of
the latter are such that they reduce buidingness to the semblance of a cloud, solid looking and
clear cut when viewed from afar, but less so when one actually gets into it. A judge may, in
the first place, restate the factual part of the precedent by lowering the level of generality in
order to effect the necessary distinction. ‘A case is only an authority for what it actually
decides. I entirely deny that it can be quoted for a proposition that may seem to follow
logically from it’: so said Lord Halsbury10, and this words are classic authority for this
particular distinguishing technique. The two decisions then, as Lord Simon put it, are like
‘binary starts each part of which lives within the field of the other and is essentially
influenced by it.11. In this way it is theoretically possible to confine the authority of
Donoghue v Steveson12 to the manufacture of ginger beer and to disginguish it from a case
concerning the manufacture of fruit-salaed; but it is obvious that the lengths to which this
technique can be carried have to be regulated by common sense. A distinction has to be
reasonable, else it will not satisfy the desire that justice should be done. Alternatel;y, a judge
may restate the factual part of the precedent by treating as material such additional facts as
will move it away from the case in hand13. Again, it is possible to evade a precedent by
treating the less appropriate of alternate principles as it ratio. Or, the ruling hitherto regarded
as being the ratio may be rejected as dictum. Asquith LJ once quoted the following remarks;
“the rule is quite siple: if you agree with the other bloke you say it part of the ratio; if you
don’t, you say it’s obiter dictum, with the implication that he is a congenital idiot” a And this
may well, as a matter of pure psychological fact, have more underlying truth than we know,
or care to avow14.
 On occasions it may be difficult to decide whether a case has been overruled in a
subsequent decision, or merely distinguished. Where the House of Lords, for example, has
commented adversely on earlier decisions of inferior courts, there is often a great deal of
discretion for future courts in deciding whether the House of Lords has by its comments 
Justice In Deciding Disputes: Precedent
92
destroyed the authority of those cases, or merely distinguished them and left their authority
unimpaired15.
Changed conditions
Although a case has neither been reversed nor overruled, it may cease to be ‘law’ owing
to changed conditions and changed law: cessante ratione cessat ipsa lex. It is not easy to
detect when such situations occur, for as long as the traditional theory prevails that judges
never make law, but only declare it, two situations need to be carefully distinguished. One is
where a case is rejected as being no longer law on the ground that it is now thought never lto
have represented the law16;; the other is where a case, which is acknowledged to have been
law at the time, has ceased to have that character owing to altered circumstances. It is the
latter that is under consideration. If the law-making function of courts is admitted, then it
would be easy to reject out-of-date precedents openly on the ground of changed conditions
and not have to resort to the threadbare fiction that cases only reflect what always has been
law.
Willes CJ once said, ‘When the nature of things changes, the rules of law must change
too’17. This is a truism in that the legislature and, within limits, the court should change rules
to keep the law abreast of change. The question under review is whether changed conditions
may deprive a case of its law-quality. For instance, the decision of the Court of Appeal in Re
Polemis and Furness, Withy & Co. Ltd.18 was disapproved by the Privy Council in the
Wagon Mound19, but although it has never been overruled, it has been declared to be no
longer law in the light of the change in the law of remoteness of damage that had taken place.
There is also a strong suggestion in The Heron II20 that The Parana1, which had laid down a
rule for assessing damages in the bygone days of sailing ships, had ceased to be law in the
conditions of modern transport. When sterling changed from being a stable to a floating
currency and after Britain’s entry into the EEC, the Court of Appeal departed from the rule
laid down by the House of Lords in an earlier case2. Later, in following their decision, Lord
Denning MR remarked ‘When the nature of sterling changes, the rule of law may change
too’3. On appeal, the House of Lords affirmed the Court of Appeal and refused to follow
their previous decision, but indicated that it was for the House, and not the Court of Appeal,
to do so. The ‘changed conditions’ rule applies only to decision which are not binding. In an
important statement of the position Lord Simon said:
‘To sum up on this part of the case: (1) the maxim in the form ‘cessante ratione cessat
ipsa’ reflects one of the considerations which your Lordships a previous decision of your
Lordships’ House; (2) in relation to courts bound by the rule of precedent the maxim
“cessante ratione cesat ipsa lex”, in its literal and widest sense, is misleading and erroneous;
(3) specifically, courts which are bound by the rule of precedent are not free to disregard an
otherwise binding precendent on the ground that the reason which led to the formulation of
the rule embodied in such precedent seems to the court to have lost cogency; (4) the maxim
in reality reflects the process of legal reasoning whereby a previous authority is judicially
distinguished or an exception is made to a principal legal rule; (5) an otherwise binding
precedent or rule may, on proper analysis, be held to have been impliedly overruled by a
subsequent decision of a higher court or impliedly abrogated by an Act of Parliament; but 
Justice In Deciding Disputes: Precedent
93
this doctrine is not accurately reflected by citation of the maxim “cessante ratione cessat ipsa
lex”4
Overruling
This refers to the action of a superior court in upsetting the ratio laid down by a lower court
in some other case. Reversal, which is the overthrow of a decision on appeal in the same cae,
may involve disapproval of the ratio as stated by the lower court; but it need not, as where the
decision is revered on some other point. Overruling necessarily involves disapproval of the
ratio, but never affects the previous decision so that the parties in the judicata; and accounts
that have been settled also are not affected5. A theoretical question arises when a superior
court declares that a ratio enunciated previously by a lower court is wrong, but at the same
time decides the present case with similar facts in the same way but for a different reason. If
it is accepted that, whatever is held to constitute the ratio decidendi of a case, at least nothing
can be ratio which does not support the order that is made, then the new ruling is ratio; but
even if it is not, it may well prove to be so authoritative as to reduce the distinction between
ratio and dictum to vanishing point6. If a case is overruled by statute, there is some ground
for saying that its ratio is no longer authoritative7. A case may first be overruled and then
reversed, as when the ratio is overthrown by superior authority in another case while there is
still time within which to appeal in the first case, and an appeal is then lodged against the
decision, which is duly reversed8. It is also possible for a case to be first reversed and then
overruled, as when the decision is reversed on appeal on some other point without affecting
the ratio, and the ratio is then overthrown in another case. If a case is overruled and the
overruling case is itself reversed9, or overruled10, the first will revive. Statutory repeal
operates prospectively, unless the statute itself subsequently overruled by statute. Does case
A revive? By analogy with the case law position it is submitted that it does11.
 It is a not possible to lay down a rule as to when it is or is not permissible to overrule12/
There will sometimes be a bold rejection even of settled doctrine13, at others three will be a
timid refusal to eradicate obsolete and Lords considered whether or not to overrule a previous
decision of its own. Various considerations were mentioned. In the first place, it was said to
be (a) Finality is necessary in developing the law; (b) a tenable view taken in case I should
not be cast aside by an equally tenable opposite view in case 2, or this in turn may be cast
aside in case 3; and (c) it is important not to encourage the re-opening of questions. Secondly,
overruling is legitimate when broad issues of legal principle are involved, or if a decision has
been disapproved, or distinguished on inadequate grounds. Thirdly, it is earlier to overrule a
recent decision before it has been acted on. Fourthly, overruling should rarely occur in
matters of statutory construction according to two of their Lordship, but two others thought
the earlier case to have been wrongly decided, only a minority were prepared to overrule it17.
 Circumstances which might tend to strengthen the authority of a case and which would
work against it being overruled are the unanimity of the court, the eminence of the judges
who composed it, the approval of the decision in later cases and by the profession at large,
the evidence in the report that the issue was fully and carefully argued by counsel and that the
court took time to deliberate, and the length of time for which the decision has stood. This
last is especially important since the longer a case has stood, the more people will have 
Justice In Deciding Disputes: Precedent
94
governed their transactions on the basis of what is thought to be law18. Similarly, factors
which might make a court more ready to overrule an earlier case are a lack of unanimity in
the judgments, the failure to take notice of relevant authorities, the lack of eminence of the
judges who decided notice of relevant authorities, the lack of eminence of the judges who
decided it, the fact that the report is of poor quality, the fact that the issue was not fought out
fully but was compromised, the fact that the judgment was extrempore and the matter had not
been properly argued, the fact that the case has been doubted or criticised in subsequent
decisions or by the profession or in commentaries of jurists, and, by no means least, if the
decision is thought to be plainly wrong.
 Overruling may be express or implied. It is implied when the ratio of the later decision of
a superior court is inconsistent with that of the inferior court. In view of the difficulty of
ascertaining the ratio of a case, it follows that it is equally difficult to decie whether a case
has been impliedly overruled or not19, but it does give court a loophole for escaping from
stare decisis.
 That effect of overruling is retroactive except that it does not unsettle matters which are
res judicata as between the parties to the overruled decision, and accounts which have been
settled20. Retroactivity is logically reconcilable with the theory that judges do not make law
but only declare what always has been law on the hypothesis that the overruled decision was
an erroneous declaration of the law and hence void ab initio. This reason may be an ex post
facto rationalisation. A more fundamental reason seems equally plausible, namely that just
quality is inherent in every law. Therefore, an unjust (hence erroneous) precedent can never
have been ‘law’. However, the retroactive rule creates a difficulty. The House of Lords
insists that only the House can declare its own decisions wrong and that lower courts must
follow them. This implies that such previous decisions are ‘law’, albeit ‘bad law’, since no
court can be bound to follow that which is not ‘law’, albeit ‘bad law, since no court can be
bound to follow that which is not law. If so, the overruling by the House of Lords of one of
its own decisions must operate prospectively, unless there is express provision to the
contrary. Everything that occurred prior to repeal; remains governed by the repealed statute.
 Even if it is be conceded that judges do make law, the question of hardship would remain
in that those who had acted in reliance on the law prevailing at the time would be judged on
the basis of a different law made ex post facto. This consideration weighs powerfully against
overruling except for compelling reasons. A suggestion that merits serious attention is that
overruling, like repeal, should take effect for the future only, and that the decision in the
instant case should abide by the previous law for the last time1. The objections do not appear
to be conclusive. It might be said that if the new rule, which is to supplant the old, does not
support the actual decision it can only be a dictum. This might be countered by the argument
that the tribunal is only freeing itself for the future from any constraining effect of its own
decision, thus enabling itself to adopt the dictum later. It might also be objected that a litigant
would not be encouraged to appeal against a bad precedent if the overruling of it would not
avail him. There is probably some substance in this in a limited number of cases, but against
it there is a factor which often stands in the way of much-needed reform. Besides, the
objection would be met by coupling prospective overruling with a discretion to overrule for
the future and for the instant case, or for the future only, or for the future, the instant case and 
Justice In Deciding Disputes: Precedent
95
retrospectively. Prospective overruling will be helpful where the object is to create a new
criminal offence, or extend an existing one, by overruling a case which had held that there is
no liability in that situation; for this would avoid having to punish the accused in the instant
case for conduct which was not a crime when he did it. 
its own decisions must operate prospectively, unless there is express provision to the
contrary. Everything that occurred prior to repeal; remains governed by the repealed statute.
 Even if it is be conceded that judges do make law, the question of hardship would remain
in that those who had acted in reliance on the law prevailing at the time would be judged on
the basis of a differ


its own decisions must operate prospectively, unless there is express provision to the
contrary. Everything that occurred prior to repeal; remains governed by the repealed statute.
 Even if it is be conceded that judges do make law, the question of hardship would remain
in that those who had acted in reliance on the law prevailing at the time would be judged on
the basis of a differ